***<p align=center>"Life is miraculous"</center>***

What is this statement trying to express? According to the dictionary, we have:

> *Life (n): the condition that distinguishes animals and plants from inorganic
matter, including the capacity for growth, reproduction, functional activity,
and continual change preceding death.*

We used to think this was caused by an "élan vital" (vital force), but as
science improved, we dispelled that superstition. As Wikipedia explains:

> *Current general consensus by geneticists is that they see no life force other
than the organisational matrix contained in the genes themselves.*

These days we know that nothing is literally *miraculous*; everything in the
world can be adequately explained by other things in the world. The word
"miraculous" has come to mean something more like "really amazing." So "life is
miraculous" means roughly that *the capacity for certain kinds of matter to walk
and talk is pretty rad*. And who could argue with that? But the statement
actually has a deeper origin -- one that you once intimately knew, but may have
long since forgotten.

---

Imagine being in a nighttime dream. Your dream character's name is Character,
and your waking self is named Dreamer. Character doesn't necessarily share any
of Dreamer's traits or memories. In fact, suppose you (as Character) have no
concept of Dreamer at all.

One day you are stunned by a gorgeous red flower and are driven to ask: what
causes me to see this brilliant hue? Using the scientific method, you discover
that the Sun is emitting photons, which reflect off flavonoids in the flower,
get transduced by opsins in your retina, turn into electrical impulses that
travel to your visual cortex, and voilà! You now have a complete description of
how you see a red flower. No magic necessary.

Then one dream day you become
*[lucid](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucid_dream)* in your dream. You discover,
beyond any doubt, that the entire dream is made of your mind. Not *Character's*
mind, but *Dreamer's*. The experience called "brilliant red flower" is not
produced by any phenomenon *inside* the dream, and certainly not by anything
inside Character's imaginary skull. It is simply Dreamer's mind, *glowing* --
just like everything else that you (as Character) have been seeing, smelling,
tasting, hearing, touching, and thinking. The whole dream is made of a
luminosity that comes from beyond the dream itself.

In the same way, what you right now experience as "the world" -- all the sights,
sounds, smells, tastes, textures, thoughts, etc. -- are made of your mind, but
not your *personal* mind. Not something inside your skull, despite all the
empirical evidence very suggestively hinting that way. Not by anything in
"reality" at all. What **you** really are is *that which glows realities into
existence*. As ludicrous as that sounds, it is something that can be known with
certainty.

The experience you know as "life" *is* genuinely miraculous, in a meaningful
sense. This sense is hard to communicate, but it can be known directly, by
*waking up*. But like with nighttime lucid dreams, it is very common to lose
lucidity -- that is, to find oneself back inside the narrative, with its
fiendishly convincing realism. Repeated awakenings, possibly spanning multiple
"lifetimes," are generally required for full awakening.

---

It is the fading memory of this marvel that we try to preserve with the
platitude "life is miraculous." This statement has a deeper meaning, and
reflecting on it can be a powerful aid in awakening. We do ourselves no favors
by pretending that we have transcended the primitive notion that there is more
to this story than meets the eye -- or microscope, for that matter.

---

At this point, a question commonly arises: how can you know that your memory of
having "woken up" is authentic? How do you know it wasn't just some scrambled
neurotransmitters that convinced you of a nice fairytale?

Nighttime lucidity can occur in degrees. At the extreme end, one can unravel and
re-ravel the whole show, thread by thread, discovering the precise reason behind
each dream element. During this process, there is no room for doubt: one can
plainly see how it is all created, because one is still creating it.
Nonetheless, when again embedded in the narrative, all that is retained is a
faint memory and some clues.

If this memory is not enough on its own, you can look at the question in another
way. Normally when we ask: "which is more likely: that this whole 'dream' thing
is true, or that I was just hallucinating?," we ask it rhetorically. Obviously
the answer is the latter. But it turns out that the answer is *not* so obvious.
While we normally ask this question in the service of keeping ourselves asleep,
it can also be used to wake ourselves up.

In the next section, we will see how.