
Imagine you are having a nighttime dream, looking at a beautiful flower. What
is the flower made of?

This is, of course, a trick question: there is no real flower there that could
be made of anything. So we might try asking instead, what is the glowing
apparition made of? What is the cause or substance of this glowing red
experience?

Even this question is hard to interpret, but one answer is that it's made of
the luminosity of your own mind. Your own mind is glowing in the form of a red
flower (as well as all the other colors, sounds, textures, etc. that constitute
the dream). Of course when we say "your," we're not talking about the dream 
character you're playing. We mean the dreamer herself, who lives outside the 
dream.

---

Now imagine you're a scientist in this dream, trying to investigate the *source* 
or *cause* of this glowing. Whatever answer you come up with will be in terms of
dream objects. The dream sun is giving off dream photons, which bounce off the
dream flower and enter your dream retina, where dream photoreceptors transduce
the signal for further processing by a dream visual cortex....

But no matter how precise you make this, you will never find the actual cause of 
the glowing, because it isn't actually generated by anything *in* the dream.
And yet, since you "know" there is nothing outside the dream, you will start to
believe that you've actually solved the problem. Some people in the dream claim
that the source of the luminosity lies beyond the dream, but you're not naive
enough to fall for religious nonsense.

One day you notice something a little odd about the dream. A small discrepancy 
you never really noticed before. Or maybe you *had* noticed it, but you wrote 
it off as no big deal. This time, as you give it your full attention, something 
unspeakably trippy happens: *you wake up*.

But instead of waking up *out of* the dream, you wake up *into* it. This
experience is hard to convey unless you've had a lucid dream before. It is the
experience of having been walking around assuming that you're awake, in the real 
world, only to discover like a sledgehammer that *this is all your mind.* You 
become vividly *awake* in a way that you never were while you were still being 
bamboozled by the dream -- and you now recognize this wakefulness as your natural 
state in the *real* real world, beyond the dream.

---

The realization sends a shock wave through the dream universe, making it
suddenly malleable in fantastic ways. What a glorious trick! You've never felt 
this much joy in your life! How funny to have spent all that time trying to
investigate the source of luminosity, the very *substance* of the dream world! 
How silly to have been *so utterly certain* that you'd find its cause *within* 
the dream!

But then somehow, the realization starts slipping away from you. You fall back
under the swoon of the dream and resume your life as a scientist, forgetting
almost entirely about the awakening. Damn, you have a publication deadline this
week. You're only halfway done with this paper explaining the cause of seeing
the color red! Luckily, you know it's absolutely correct, because science. Yet
something tickles at the back of your mind. Something you'd feel foolish sharing
with colleagues.

You start to have more periodic awakenings. Sometimes, as before, you wake up
*into* the dream. Other times, the excitement is so overwhelming that you wake
up *out* of the dream, into your *real* life. But somehow you keep coming back
into the same dream.

---

One day, after much practice, you find a way to walk the razor's edge between
waking up *out* of the dream and waking up *into* it. This time, you watch
carefully as the whole dream *unravels*, leaving you in a perfectly dark
(no sights, no sounds, no thoughts, no personality) yet conscious void. But this
void is inherently unstable, and with the stirring of the first whispers of
thought, the dream suddenly re-inflates, like a Big Bang.

The unmanifest luminosity of the Void starts to take shape as colors, sounds,
textures, etc., and weaves itself into an entire universe. In the finishing
touches of this most remarkable and fiendish illusion, your dream character's
reasoning capacity comes online: "Yup, just another day in the life of this
totally real world! Time to fight traffic and get to work as though this is
all normal!"

Over time, you start to get more insight into the nature of the dream. It's
not modeled after some "real world" that exists anywhere. Instead, latent
propensities of the mind of the dreamer are responsible for giving the dream its
particular shape. The dreamer was hungry, so this dream has a lot of food. The
dreamer had a bad day at work, and so this dream is turbulent.

---

Of course, as a scientist, you can't go around telling this to your fellow dream
characters. You'd be laughed off as a lunatic. Besides, there is somehow always 
a perfectly reasonable explanation *within* the dream. The food is there because
some people delivered it, and before that some people grew it. Look, here's the
delivery slip! The dream is turbulent because of a weather system. Just check
the Doppler Radar!

One of the key features of this dream is that it is (almost) always internally 
consistent and logical. If it weren't, the character would wake up too fast, and 
the dreamer doesn't want that. She's dreaming for a reason.

This puts you in a bind. Having seen what you've seen, the most correct
explanation of the world's dynamics involves a psyche that is external to the
dream and thus "supernatural." The luminosity that constitutes the dream also
comes from a mind beyond it. It cannot be properly explained from within the
dream, so it's "miraculous." But these words are taboo in your culture, so you
can do little more than make hints designed to wake the others up (and hope you
don't get put in the loony bin in the process).

Meanwhile, since everyone else believes that reality is made of "stuff"
(a philosophical position called *materialism*), they can do little more than
try to accumulate more and better stuff (a sociological problem 
not-so-coincidentally *also* called materialism). The dream world slowly 
degrades into a wasteland for the simple reason that nobody bothered to examine 
its nature closely enough.

---

This is as good an analogy as I can muster for our present situation. Being
an analogy, it will be imperfect in various ways.

* The psyche whose dream this is, is not another human, but what the mystical
traditions call "God." Roughly speaking, God is looking through the eyes of
your dream character, pretending to be a confused human (you). That flower in
front of you is made of your (God's) mind. Just look.

* The outside of this dream does not have metaphysical processes like time and
space. Those illusions belong to this dream.

* This dream is *much more internally consistent* than any nighttime dream.
It is correspondingly harder to get your mind around the possibility that it
*is* one, and thus *much* harder to wake up.

* In a nighttime dream, there is only one true perspective (yours). All the
other dream characters are not really conscious. The actuality here is much
harder to explain.

* ... 

Nonetheless, it *is* possible to awaken, and it *is* possible to know things 
about the nature of this reality that are not apparent from inside it. That
does not necessarily mean it is possible to demonstrate these things to others.

It is made entirely of your (God's) own mind, and this luminous fabric exists
beyond the categories of "time" and "space." You were never born, and you will
not die. "You" currently have a front-row seat to a timeless, magical theater. 
When you see this, you will be moved in a way that you never imagined possible. 
The purpose of life is to wake up to this miracle of miracles, and live your 
life in accordance with it. It really is all about love.

But of course, this is just like, my opinion, man....

---
