
Sometimes you get the sense that life is magical or miraculous. You courageously
discard this idea as irrational. You're not naive enough to believe in such
fairy tales.

It *is* just a fairy tale, isn't it? ....

---

In a nighttime dream, you believe yourself to be a character wandering around as
an isolated subject in a fundamentally external and threatening world. The only
way to see through this illusion is to become *lucid*, at which point you
discover that the whole of "reality" -- all the sights, sounds, textures, etc.
that constitute the dream -- are made of the light of your own mind. Not "you"
as in the *character*, but you as in the *dreamer* -- a being that exists beyond
the confines of the dream.

With increased lucidity, you discover that you do not occupy a position sitting
behind the character's eyes, observing all this light. Instead, you *are* the
light. "You" are distributed throughout the entirety of the apparent reality;
its very fabric. And with still further awakening, you discover that the
storyline of the dream is not something happening *to* you (perpetrated by your
subconscious mind), but instead something you are actively *doing*. You weave
yourself into a fantastical adventure and then embed yourself in it as an
apparently localized, isolated subject.

Once you see this clearly, there can be no doubt. You are free to weave and
re-weave realities as you see fit; to lose yourself in them for arbitrarily long
periods of "time" (another devious invention of your making, not necessarily
present in all dreams); to generate apparently external beings who ruthlessly
mock you for questioning reality; to rediscover the truth (it's infinitely
delightful every. single. time.); and to rinse, lather, and repeat to your
heart's content.

---

By now you may have suspected that what I'm saying applies not only to nighttime
dreams, but to your present one as well. But just as you would at night, you
find this idea to be utterly preposterous; not even worth a second thought. You
will devise comically useless tests to "prove" that it's false. *Look how
internally consistent this place is! Look at all the external evidence! I'm not
clever enough to invent this place!* Well, your character certainly isn't, but
You are.

If you really want to become lucid, you will have to dig really deep, and not
turn tail at the first sign of difficulty. You will have to ignore all the
warning signs: "Do Not Enter! Nothing to see here! Don't be ridiculous! The
*scientists* would have found this out already! *Sciiiieeeence!*"

So how do you do it? How do you become lucid? That's too big a topic to cover in
one post, but here are some hints.

---

First you must understand, intellectually, that many radically skeptical
hypotheses are not meaningfully *unlikely*. If you try to prove that it is
"unlikely" that this is a dream, you will find yourself presupposing that it is
not, in one sneaky way or another. This is circular reasoning, and utterly
bogus. Similarly: did the world suddenly pop into being one moment ago, or is
the past real? Any way you try to establish a real past, you will find yourself
subtly assuming one: "we know (from past experience) that the world just doesn't
work that way!" If you find yourself resisting this point, sit down and look
more carefully and honestly. 

Philosophers discard these hypotheses not because they are *unlikely*, but
because they are (apparently) useless. So what if the past isn't "really" real?
That shouldn't change our behavior, should it? So there's no use in taking it
seriously.

But the point isn't to start believing weird things like "the past isn't real."
It is to notice that some deep part of you absolutely refuses to even consider
that such things may be genuinely true. Something in you is *dead certain*, far
beyond mere practical value. Just as in a nighttime dream, it is this utter
(unfounded) certainty about the nature of reality that prevents you from giving
it a completely* honest look. You must find its root cause.

The next step is to understand, intellectually, that the world around you is
made of your own mind. You can accept this even as a materialist, by
substituting "my own mind" with "my own neurons firing." Every sight you see,
every sound you hear, every thought you think, is your own mind, illuminated.
Just listen: what *else* could that experience be than your own mind?

Once you recognize that your *experienced* world is made of your own mind, your
mind will instinctively assert "but *obviously* there's a real world out there,
*causing* it." This is the crucial moment. It is *not* obvious. Purely rationally
speaking, it is not even "likely." If you can *grok* the fact that the apparent
world is your own mind, and simultaneously *grok* that there is no reason to
take the standard explanation literally, then there is the possibility of
becoming lucid. In Eastern traditions, this is known as awakening. It is simple,
but it is not easy.

You might wonder: if the Buddha was lucid, why wasn't he flying around with
superpowers and such? And now for the punchline: this is *your* dream. The
Buddha is an idea you planted to remind yourself how to wake up. Instead of
waiting for "others" to wake up and prove it to you, why not do it yourself?

---

The Light that constitutes your reality comes from beyond it, and in a sense,
the whole point of the dream is to awaken completely to its majesty.

> So close you can't see it
>
> So deep you can't fathom it
>
> So simple you can't believe it
>
> So good you can't accept it
>
> &nbsp;
>
> -- Tibetan Buddhist saying