
I'm going to let you in on the Big Secret. It's safe to share because deep down
you already suspect it. Nonetheless, reading it here, you almost certainly won't
believe it. You'll think it's a strange fairy tale, quite irrelevant to your
life, and move on with your day. But I assure you it's quite true, and something
that you can confirm for yourself if you choose.

---

Imagine your name is Taylor, and you're having a nighttime dream. In this
dream, your name is Jamie, and Jamie has a different personality and history
than Taylor. You see a beautiful red flower. Now: what is the flower made of?

The question is mistaken, of course: there's no real flower there. What, then,
are you seeing?

What you're really seeing is Taylor's mind, illuminated in the form of a visual
experience called "a red flower." This mind is also illuminating itself as the
rest of the sights, sounds, smells, textures, etc. that together constitute the
dream. But you, as Jamie, have no way of knowing this. Even if a dream character
were to tell you "Hey, wake up! You're actually Taylor!", you'd shrug it off.

Instead, being rational, you use the scientific method to try to figure out how
you're seeing a red flower. You track the behavior of photons, retinal opsins,
neurotransmitters, etc. inside the dream and conclude that they, together, tell
the whole story. Photons leave the sun, bounce off pigments in the flower, and
get transduced in your eye. A signal travels to your visual cortex, and then a
hard-to-define phenomenon called "consciousness" inside your brain produces a
glowing red experience. No need for ridiculous theories like *the whole world
consisting of a luminous mind that transcends the dream*.

You can probably see where this is going.

Look at a flower right now. What are you seeing? Forget all the science you know
for a moment. All you can say is that there seems to be a luminous experience
floating there. Close your eyes and listen to a sound. What is it? Out of the
dark background of silence comes a glowing, textured, *experience*. There seems
to be an experiential capacity -- normally called *mind* -- that manifests in
the form of sights, sounds, smells, tastes, textures, thoughts, memories,
feelings, etc. Your whole world is made of this luminous fabric of mind. Really
stop and notice this as carefully as you can.

The Big Secret is that the mind taking shape as this dream, transcends this
dream. You could call it God's mind if so inclined. At the same time, it is
*your* mind. Yes -- *you are God, dreaming that you're not*.

If Jamie were told that the world were *her* dream, she wouldn't believe it
(unless the dream storyline called for her to). She would do everything in her
power to resist the conclusion. But every now and then, perhaps she becomes
*lucid*. She suddenly realizes "oh sh*t, this is all my mind!" -- and in the
process, realizes that "I" doesn't really refer to *Jamie* (who never existed
in the first place), but to *Taylor.* It's not exactly Jamie's dream, but it
*is* the dream of that-which-looks-through-her-eyes; that which Jamie knows
intimately as "I."

Jamie might try to doubt it, but if Taylor's mind wills it so, there will be
no denying it. It has the capacity to transform or unravel the dream in
arbitrarily "impossible" ways until it becomes clear beyond any shadow of doubt.

On the other hand, this awakening process is generally a slow one. Jamie will
repeatedly fall out of lucidity, and only vaguely remember the Truth. Because
it doesn't jibe with the dream's narrative, she won't really believe it. She
will assume it's just some stray neurotransmitters playing tricks on her. But
she's already seen too much and knows better.

Why is it that we can't even agree on a good definition of consciousness, let
alone figure out what's causing it (known for good reason as the "Hard Problem
of Consciousness")? Why is it that leading scientists and technologists are
becoming increasingly convinced that our world is a simulation of sorts? Are
these just minor bumps on the inevitable march toward a comprehensive 
understanding of physical reality? Or are you actually God, rousing from a
seemingly eons-long slumber?

There *is* a way to answer this question conclusively. 

You're enveloped in a miracle far beyond your wildest imagination. All you have 
to do is wake up to it.
