
> *Most of us suspect we don’t really know what life is. But really **knowing** 
you don't know takes some work. It requires you to clearly see that your story 
is just a story; and to become conscious of the deep mystery at its foundation.*
>
> -- Tim Freke

I want to share with you the Big Secret. The meaning of life, the nature of
consciousness, and all that. I'm well aware that this is about the most
presumptuous thing a person can say. I'll let you decide for yourself whether
it's true.

---

I want you to imagine being in a nighttime dream. In waking life, your name is 
Dreamer, and in the dream, your name is Character (creative, I know).

Imagine that as Character, you have not only a different name, but also a 
different personality and life story than Dreamer. As far as you know, "Dreamer"
refers to someone other than yourself -- if s/he exists at all.

Unlike normal, this dream world is rather well-behaved. Things don't just shift
around without rhyme or reason, but seem to follow consistent rules.

One day, seeing a beautiful red flower, you commit to figuring out *how* you
see it. The ancients thought it was mysterious (the Lakota Indians even describe
it all as "The Great Mystery"), but you know that only science can truly tackle 
it.

After years of intense study, precisely tracking the behavior of tiny objects, 
you finally have the answer. Photons are reflected off anthocyanins in the 
flower, get transduced by opsins in your retina, triggering a cascade of 
neurotransmitters in your visual cortex, and voilà! You now know where 
consciousness comes from, and how it produces the experience of a red flower. 
Case closed.

Then one day, out of the blue, you become [lucid](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucid_dream). With a shock, you discover that you are not really
Character, but Dreamer *dreaming* that she is Character. What you thought was
a real red flower at some distance from you is actually just Dreamer's mind,
illuminated. In fact, the whole dream -- all the sights, sounds, textures,
smells, etc. -- is made of nothing but the brilliant luminosity of Dreamer's
mind. The whole subject-object dichotomy (me over here, a flower over there,
and a process called "consciousness" that connects the two) is seen to be a
clever illusion. There is nothing *else* experiencing Dreamer's luminous mind; 
in a hard-to-communicate sense, it is *experiencing itself*.

How did you never notice this before?! It's so obvious! The "fabric" that
constitutes the dream is not itself generated by anything *within* the dream.
It *transcends* the dream, and is in this sense genuinely *miraculous*. It's 
so obvious that you could surely never forget it.

But shortly later -- as is common with lucid dreams -- the lucidity is lost.
As you make the transition back into Character, you desperately try to hold onto
the Truth. But all you can scribble down in your limited mind is 

> ***It's a f'ing miracle.***

You have a truly remarkable proof of this fact, but [the margins of
your mind are now too small to contain it](https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Pierre_de_Fermat).

---

You carry on with your life as Character in the "real world," but 
the memory nags at you. There's no such thing as a miracle, dammit! The cause of
every single thing in this dream -- er, world -- can be discovered with enough
patience. Yes, life is pretty amazing, but it's not *magic*. As the dictionary
points out, life is simply

> the condition that distinguishes animals and plants from inorganic matter, including the capacity for growth, reproduction, functional activity, and continual change preceding death.

And each one of those behaviors can be explained objectively. What's the big
deal?

Maybe you're just mis-remembering. Maybe what you really meant to record was
"the *universe* is miraculous." But this is no better: cosmologists are quickly
narrowing in on the cause of the Big Bang. Of course, the question they're
*really* trying to answer is "assuming there was something (the quantum foam) 
already there, how did it evolve?", but that's basically the same
thing as "how could something have come from nothing"... isn't it?

Perhaps you meant "*consciousness* is miraculous," but again, you already have
a complete explanation in terms of neurotransmitters. *So what could you 
possibly have meant?*

The only reasonable explanation is that you were simply *wrong.* Some stray
neurotransmitters in your brain must have sent you a poetic message, which in 
your naivete, you took to be literal. How silly! All it meant is that "life is
pretty cool." Nothing mysterious about that.

Ahh, everything is right again!

---

But lucidity can be deepened with practice. At first, you somehow *know* that
you're dreaming, but nothing in the dream environment particularly gives
evidence of the fact. You simply *remember*: *"oh yeah, this is a dream!"*
This allows room for doubt later. 

As the process deepens, that room slowly vanishes. Once Dreamer's mind 
wants to demonstrate to Character that the whole thing is her own self-illusion,
there is simply no stopping it. She can manipulate reality in arbitrarily
strange and impossible ways. Ways that are objectively verifiable -- that is,
verifiable by other people and instruments *in the dream*. She can show you how
trusting in "objectively verifiable" was a marvelous ruse. She can unravel and
re-ravel each bit of reality, showing precisely how and why it was created. And
you see that it's been you, the whole time.

*All realities are my dream, and all dreams are made of my mind. Some dreams
contain "space," "time," and "matter," but most do not. We will spend as many 
eternities as needed for you to grok this. During the whole process, you will 
have never left the placeless place; the dawn of creation.*

---

The Big Secret, of course, is that this is where you find yourself right now.
This is all *your* dream. Time, space, and all the rest, are illusions that
you are actively and intentionally generating. The tricky part is in 
understanding what it means to be "yours." It is important to understand that
we are not talking about *solipsism,* where the whole world is your *personal* 
dream.

If Character were told "this is your dream," she would surely object -- and in
a sense, she would be right. Her body, personality, etc. -- everything that
she normally considers *her* -- are just fictions *inside* the dream. But in 
another sense, it really *is* true: if Character were to look backward in the 
direction she most intimately knows as "I" -- and crucially, to do it sincerely 
and precisely enough -- she would discover Dreamer herself. Or more accurately, 
*Dreamer would re-discover herself.*

Where the analogy breaks down is that the one dreaming you is not just another
being in a world outside your own. It is not another being at all, but
*being-ness itself*. Its dreams are much grander, and can support much more
internal consistency and regularity, than the nighttime ones we are used to.

Listen to a sound. Can you get the sense that it is made
of luminous mind-stuff? It is not your personal mind-stuff, but primordial 
mind-stuff. There is nobody sitting inside your head, experiencing this
mind-stuff. Your whole (apparent) reality has been made of it, experiencing 
itself. It is genuinely miraculous, in the sense described above. From time to
time you notice this, but dismiss it as nonsense.

There is no reason to believe any of this, of course. Even if you try, you may
find yourself only getting as far as "oh, maybe he just means that my brain 
gives rise to my personal experience of reality." But as in the story of
Character, there *is* a way to see unequivocally beyond this most cunning ruse. 
Until you do, this will all sound like a nice (or perhaps horrifying) fable.

---

* "What about other people? Are they just figments of my imagination?"

In a sense, yes: we are *all* just figments of Dreamer's imagination. One
Dreamer looking out through many eyes. That is the fundamental reason for
compassion. But if you misunderstand and think "this is all a figment of my
*personal* imagination," your dream will go south very quickly. This, I believe,
is the cause of [psychedelic-induced psychosis](../insanity.html).

* "How does this knowledge help me? Aren't I still constrained by the dream's
laws?"

The dream's laws ultimately come from you. Again, not you *personally*, but
that which looks through your eyes. The closer you get to realizing this, the
more "you" may allow your dream to evolve in unexpected ways. None of them will 
defy the "laws of physics," per se, but you may encounter 
[synchronicities](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Synchronicity) that seem *a 
little too convenient.* As with a nighttime dream, it is up to you whether to 
follow them toward lucidity or use them to keep yourself asleep. Mostly we 
choose the latter.

* "If this is true, why don't I see more evidence for it?"

There are an infinite number of dreams happening "at once" (remember that time
is just an artifact of this particular dream, so simultaneity is just an
analogy). You happen to find yourself in a dream where everything is mundane.
You can also find your way into a different one.

* "So then what is this 'meaning of life' that you promised?"

The purpose is to wake up. You do this by recognizing and appreciating the
miracle that you're continually (but unknowingly) engulfed in. By releasing
the illusion of being identical with your character, yet taking radical
responsibility for her dream. By recognizing everyone and everything else as 
yourself. By relinquishing the painful illusion of a cold, uncaring external 
reality enforcing its whims upon little old separate you. By deeply releasing
all fear, blame, and guilt. By taking a leap of faith, beyond what your 
"reasonable" mind tells you is sensible.

---

If this is beginning to sound too much like the [Law of Attraction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Law_of_attraction_(New_Thought)),
I apologize. I'm not trying to support New Age (or any other) philosophy. I'm
just telling you what I know (but often don't have the courage to live). You 
really should test these things out for yourself, taking special note of the 
part of your mind saying "Why? This is clearly baloney. We're too clever for
that." In every dream, it is this same message dissuading you from becoming 
lucid. *"Nothing to see here; move right along."* Sooner or later you will 
learn to stop trusting it.

> *So close you can't see it*
>
> *So simple you can't believe it*
>
> *So deep you can't fathom it*
>
> *So good you can't accept it*
>
> -- Tibetan Buddhist saying

It's time to wake up.