---
layout: page
title: Transcending metaphysics
description: What remains when you stop believing?
---

> "Reality is that which, when you stop believing in it, doesn't go away." --
Philip K Dick

## Summary

So-called physical reality is a manifestation of your mind.

### Q&A

---
**Q**: No, time and space are obviously real.

**A**: If you ponder carefully, you will discover that your belief in
space and time are merely a *preference*, though you believe them to
be the result of evidence and logic.

You can understand this intellectually but still *feel* very strongly
about your beliefs. This profound emotional investment is a defense
mechanism that will protect you from understanding what is written here.

---
**Q**: I can't have dreamed this up. I'm not nearly smart enough to
imagine all of this.

**A**: If by "you" you mean the fleshy avatar you've dreamed up to
identify with, of course you're not. But that's not what you are.

---
**Q**: So why can't I conjure up a million dollars by wishing it?

**A**: The mind operates in layers. Idealism predicts that your
reality is generated by very deep layers of mind. You believe very
deeply in a metaphysics that doesn't allow you to conjure money
directly, so you cannot.

---
**Q**: Or it's because materialism really is true and idealism is just
wishful thinking. Where's the evidence?

**A**: If the deep layers of your mind do not permit such evidence,
how do you expect to find any?

---
**Q**: Surely *other* people would have tried this out and succeeded.

**A**: Again, this is *your* reality. Perhaps you should ask *yourself*
why you have not permitted anyone to succeed.

---
**Q**: That's stupid. Obviously if it were up to me, I'd like a world
in which I am in charge. Why would I hide this from myself?

**A**: Is it so obvious? Could you deal with the knowledge that all
events in (seeming) history have been your doing, for example?

---
**Q**: So this is purely *my* reality? What about everyone else?

**A**: Again, the answer depends on the definition of "you."

Nonetheless, it may be instructive to consider how things look
in the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics: from any
individual's perspective, they are indeed the sole observer in their
branch of the multiverse -- i.e., in "the universe."

---
**Q**: What is the correct definition of "I"?

**A**: I can't answer that for you, but you might look into the nature
of consciousness for a clue. Consciousness feels like a property "you"
have, and under materialism it can hardly be anything else. But it is
so much more.

---
**Q**: Is there any way to gather evidence for this absurd hypothesis?

**A**: Yes, of course. You can go to a quiet place and meditate for a
long while. You will slowly awaken to the entire process by which you
are creating the dream.

---
**Q**: Oh, give me a break. I'm not spending a lifetime chasing nonsense
just to disprove it. Give me something quicker.

**A**: Fine. But first you have to promise to undo the most powerful
bad habit you have.

---
**Q**: Watching cat videos on YouTube for hours?

**A**: No, that one is fine. I'm talking about your compulsive need to
shoehorn absolutely everything into your worldview so that you don't
have to face any discomfort.

---
**Q**: Can you give me an example?

**A**: Sure. Haven't you experienced synchronicities? Fortuitous
coincidences that are just a little too tidy? That time you deeply
forgave your friend in your mind, and her demeanor was very different
the next time you met?

---
**Q**: Oh come on. Each of those is *easily* explained away. Obviously
she was responding to *my* change, and anyway, perhaps it's only *my
perception* of her that changed. Don't tell me you really believe this
sh*t about synchronicities.

**A**: Good, good! That is *precisely* the habit I'm talking about! I
want you to notice how powerful it feels to know that you're being
rational and logical and not falling for BS. And then I want you to
remember how well that worked out when confronted with the possibility
that time is not real.

Really let this sink in: it is an *emotional* choice, not a *logical*
one you are making. There is *always* another metaphysics that
accommodates the evidence, but something deep in your mind is *insanely
resistant* to seeing this.

Simply stop doing that.

---
**Q**: No. I'm *not* believing in your make-believe fantasy just to
test out this idiotic hypothesis.

**A**: I didn't say you had to. All you have to do is **stop**
boneheadedly reinforcing your preferred metaphysics. You've already
worked through reasoning showing that there's nothing particularly
rational about your present choice. Why put *so much energy* into
defending it to the death?

---
**Q**: How do you expect me to function if I'm not connecting
events through the usual mechanisms of cause and effect? It is precisely
my understanding of the world that allows me to live in it.

**A**: There's a *world* of difference between being able to use
rules *functionally* and taking them as gospel, as you now seem to be
doing. Science is obviously the best tool for connecting the dots within
your world, and you must continue to use it. Just stop conflating what
are clearly meant to be functional rules with capital-t-Truth.

It can be hard to distinguish when you are using a rule functionally
and when you are taking it literally. Therefore, as an intermediate
measure, you might consider adopting the idealist metaphysics in a
playful or tentative manner: "if this is really all my dream, what is
my dream trying to tell me right now?" or even "what if I *don't*
smother this situation with my metaphysics, just this once?"

---
**Q**: So I have to just wait for a so-called synchronicity to arise?

**A**: It is said there are ways to induce them, if you are sincere.
Some of the common methods are radical gratitude, radical forgiveness,
radical self-compassion....

---
**Q**: What's radical about them?

**A**: You apply them in situations where you normally wouldn't, and to
a degree you're not normally used to. For example, just when you're
feeling resentful about your situation, engage full reverse thrusters
into gratitude.

Or forgive someone with all your heart, even though your mind is telling
you they don't deserve it. Or love yourself even though you're a giant
f****-up.

Oh yeah, and try not to do it with the intention of gain....

---
**Q**: Why would that work?

**A**: I know how much you love cliches, but... love is your true
nature. Anything that accelerates your ability to see this will
chip away at the prison you have built. Without that, you won't trust
yourself enough to see the truth....

(Obligatory spiritual picture for irony.)