---
layout: page
title: Layers of mind
description:
---

## Layers of thought: a whirlwind tour of meditation

Have you ever had the experience of reading a book, only to discover that your
eyes are still scanning the page but your mind is elsewhere? If you're
interrupted mid-reverie, chances are you can recall the past few seconds of
thought. Those thoughts were not really outside of consciousness and yet,
somehow, you weren't really noticing them.

Chances are, you spend the vast majority of your day in such a state. The mind
readily back-fills a sense of presence, so that you can easily convince yourself
that you were present when you weren't. Beginning meditators can spend months
believing they've been following their breath, only to discover that they've
been lost in thought the whole time without noticing it. If it's that hard to
catch even when your whole being is engaged in the effort, what of the rest of
the day?

If you decide to progress on the path of meditation, this
distraction-without-knowing-it starts happening less and less. As you become
more present, you begin to detect an undercurrent of more subtle thoughts
flowing between the big, coarse ones. When even these quieten, and you're
sitting in a seemingly thought-free state, you might consider yourself basically
free of thought.

But are you really?

If you still feel like a self sitting in a world of space and time, it's because
there's still a layer of your mind you have not yet penetrated.

If you look carefully enough, you will notice that your mind is subtly but
continually weaving a narrative from your experiences. Sensations must imply
objects. Memory implies a past; anticipation implies a future; together they
imply time and a self. Etc. The sense that the past contained a physical world
bolsters the certainty that this moment must, too, and that there will be
similar moments to come, following a fairly predictable trajectory. This
narrative becomes the "background" of your experience -- feeling as though it
has been given to you or is happening to you, rather than you actively
fabricating it.

But you are fabricating it. It's just that you do it in such a subtle way that
your construction appears as tangible, palpable, externally imposed structures:
like a world out there. This seeming externality further cements your confidence
in using it as evidence. Isn't it viscerally obvious that time and space are
real, and not merely assumptions? That viscerality isn't happening to you; you
are creating it. But you treat this conclusion as evidence for itself, creating
a closed feedback loop. And it is this self-reinforcing loop that gives rise to
the palpable sense of a physical reality.

you to blame the whole thing on factors outside your control. "This universe has
been here for a long time, and for some reason gave birth to me." Any direction
you care to look, you find evidence that this isn't just a story, but the Truth.
Sshh, there there, go back to sleep, you've got it all figured out.

In other words, all the mind needs is a seed around which to spin a story, and
it will do all the rest of the work in entrenching it, fleshing out the details,
and sealing off the exits. You call this story "physical reality."
