
None of us really want to hear this, but most of us suspect it deep down: there
is something fundamentally unsustainable in how we are living, and it now
threatens the very existence of life on this planet. Even a few short years ago,
we could pretend this was a problem we could leave for our children or even
grandchildren to solve; now, it seems increasingly clear that our mindless
devastation will bear its horrific fruit within this very generation.

I will not try to justify any of the above claims. You should consider the
evidence yourself and come to your own conclusions. If you feel that everything
is fine, then by all means, carry on with the party. This series is for the
rest of you.

I don't know how best to organize these thoughts, so I'll just dump them out. Be
forewarned: they're weird.

---

Technology will not save us. At least, not if it is built on our modern
understanding of the world. What do I mean by "our modern understanding of the
world?" It is the belief that reality is made of fundamentally lifeless stuff,
mindlessly interacting to produce only the *illusion* of genuine life and
consciousness.

You have likely been brought up believing that this view is scientific or
rational. But questions about the nature of reality cannot be resolved by
empirical methods alone. If this apparently-physical reality is actually a dream
that only *appears* to be external and objective, no amount of sciencing would
necessarily reveal that. It would be up to the *dreamer* to permit such evidence
into the dream.

A sufficiently clever dream would prevent you from even *suspecting* such a
strange possibility. That is the spell we find ourselves under right now. In the
same way that a nighttime dream is made of nothing but your own mind, this
entire reality is made of your very consciousness. It is not external to you.
You are not the dream character you take yourself to be. Far from life being an
illusion, the *whole place* is fundamentally alive, and this aliveness is your
very being. We are, quite literally, all one.

The only way to confirm any of this is to *wake up*. Like with a lucid dream at
night, it is possible to verify all of this beyond any reasonable doubt. You can
introspect very precisely into how the whole mechanism operates. Afterwards, you
may still fall back into illucidity, but at least a small part of you cannot be
completely fooled any longer.

It is entirely pointless for me to try to convince you of this, but if you even
*suspect* it, now would be a great time to pursue the possibility very
earnestly. It is not primarily our societal obsession with the Kardashians
that is bringing us down; it is our unquestioned allegiance to what is, if not
exactly a *death* cult, then at least a *lifelessness* cult. It is time to
undo this brainwashing.

---

> *Indeed, it is becoming ever more obvious that it is not famine, not earthquakes, not microbes, not cancer but man himself who is man’s greatest danger to man, for the simple reason that there is no adequate protection against psychic epidemics, which are infinitely more devastating than the worst of natural catastrophes. The supreme danger which threatens individuals as well as whole nations is a psychic danger.*
>
> &nbsp;
>
> -- Carl Jung

To "individuals" and "whole nations" we can now add "all of civilization." 
Furthermore:

> *[T]he immunity of the nation depends entirely upon the existence of a leading minority immune to the evil and capable of combating the powerful suggestive effect.*

Who are these people "immune to the evil?" 

> *Nobody is immune to a nationwide evil unless he is unshakably convinced of
the danger of his own character being tainted by the same evil.*

In short, to the degree that you are still projecting blame externally, it is
not yet you. The first order of business is ending the projection of blame --
onto the fatcat bankers, the ruthless CEOs, the corrupt politicians, the
ignorant anti-vaxxers, the libtards, the Trump supporters, .... You are them,
and they are you. It is our absolute refusal to see this that will be our
downfall.

> *Such a man knows that whatever is wrong in the world is also in himself, and
if he only learns to deal with his own shadow, he has done something real for
the world. He has succeeded in shouldering at least an infinitesimal part of the
gigantic, unsolved problems of our day.*

Find whoever you most deeply want to blame, profoundly forgive them, and welcome
them with open arms into your world. Make room for them in your beautiful dream
and invite them in. Moralizing finger-pointing will only drive them further
away. "Winning" over them politically will only drive the darkness more deeply
underground, to re-emerge more virulently later. Even killing them will only
produce more of the same.

Such forgiveness will not be immediately possible for all of us. Sometimes the
pain is just too deep. But each of us has some capacity for it, and now is the
time to turn it on, full thrust.

Does this mean that we don't hold others accountable? No. Sometimes the result
of profound love is to forcibly prevent (apparent) others from causing more
damage. But it will not be accompanied by sanctimony, and this makes all the
difference.

---

> *My most recent mushroom trip (also the largest dose I've ever taken) I became
fixated on a news story I had heard that week. About an 8 year old girl from a
tribe in the Amazon, who was tied to a tree and burned alive in order to scare
her people off their land so it could be logged. I realized that at the moment
he did it, whoever lit that gasoline actually felt/thought more or less okay
about what he was doing. And my mind was illuminated with dozens of the
parallels between that man's malformed, horrific perceptual/behavioral state,
and mine. I saw the same mistakes in value attribution, the same willful
ignorance of the consequences of my acts and words. And there was nothing I
could do to deny the similarity.*

Psychedelics can offer genuine glimpses into transcendent space. The modern
understanding is that any such insights are just misbehaving neurotransmitters,
but that is sorely mistaken. It seems this dream is not without a certain humor,
imparting certain *mushrooms* (of all things) with this apparent ability.

Nonetheless, I absolutely **do not advocate** their indiscriminate use. In low
doses, you may have a pleasant enough time. On higher doses, you may be
confronted with blind spots in your worldview that you were just not ready to
have exposed. And sometimes a relatively low dose inexplicably causes high dose
effects.

It is all well and good to *understand* that this reality might be
a dream or simulation, but a very deep part of you is still *profoundly,
irrationally certain* that it is not. You do not want that part exposed before
it is ready.

> G – Everything is connected, but some things lie closer together on the infinite mesh of interconnectedness than others. This is the case with schizophrenia and what is called enlightenment. They are two manifestations of the same phenomenon. In both cases the mind has come to the end of conventional thought. There are two possible reactions to this. The first is to let go of the mind and the ego. The other is to try to maintain the mind and ego in the face of the infinite, which is dangerous. 
>
> &nbsp;
>
> S - Can you explain what you mean by “to the end of conventional thought”?
>
> &nbsp;
>
> G – Thought is limited. What the mind can know is limited. What can be known is infinite. When something limited comes up against something infinite, it reveals itself as being infinitely small. Some people, for whatever reason, have an experience of this infinity, this nothingness out of which all manifestation springs. When that happens, their consciousness undergoes a revolution. This is what happened to Jesus, to the Buddha, and to a great many more people who we have never heard of. This is also what happens to what we call schizophrenics, although their consciousnesses are prevented from undergoing the same revolution due mainly to fear. They are afraid—and this is not a judgement of them—of letting go of their egos, of their thoughts, and of falling back into that infinite nothingness that they have become aware of. Of course, it is impossible to try to figure out infinity, and to carry the ego into infinity.
>
> &nbsp;...
>
> You can put down the bag of stones and swim, or you can hold onto it and flounder. The bag is your identity, your thoughts, everything that you believe makes you who you are. The bag is your separateness. You cannot keep it, yet many try to.
>
> &nbsp;
>
> S – So what happens if you let go of the bag? You become Jesus I suppose.
>
> &nbsp;
>
> G – No, you become what you are in essence, which is what Jesus was in essence—pure love. You are that which has always been aware of your thoughts, of your ego. You become the swimmer instead of the bag of stones.

"Ego" here does not refer to your sense of pride. It refers to the entire
structure of your mind, and especially the lie it continually repeats to itself,
that it knows how reality operates. Do not partake in psychedelics unless you
are willing to abandon *everything you know*, and even then, tread carefully.

---


